---
layout: blog
title: Reflection on Final Year at Amherst
tags: life education school
---

I was submerged in a spa this winter break, soaking in indulgence, when a curious observation emerged through the clouds of steam. The voice in my head, the admonishing super-ego was silent. The unrelentingly critical voice telling me that I should be working harder, that I haven’t achieved enough, that my time is limited, that I’ve amounted to nothing important so far.

I’ve always obeyed that voice. My first three years at Amherst, I overloaded and took an extra class every semester except for junior fall, where recruiting for summer internships was essentially my extra class. My freshman year, I joined crew, training and rowing for at least 20 hours a week. Sophomore fall I worked 40 hours a week at 6 jobs. Even my semester abroad sophomore spring at AIT-Budapest, I took an extra class at Budapest Semester in Mathematics.

Why, you may ask, did I go that extra mile, take on that extra obligation? Well first, I had always been a relentless optimizer, a trait born from when pragmatism sorted out the mess after ideals and reality collide. For most things in life, I sought the highest quality I could afford and the highest efficiency I could maintain. I search for the best restaurants, but only two dollar signs or less. I read the news daily, but mainly from aggregators or the Economist. I believe my time is valuable, but that I am also human, and that sensibly appeasing my basic desires is better than denying or repressing them.

And so stepping foot onto this verdant campus, on the cusp of adulthood, I thought this was one of my last chances to immerse myself in the life of the mind. I believed in the liberal arts experience, in education to not only live a life of consequence but a life of meaning. In my mind, that meant exploring and partaking at Amherst all that would be difficult to do later. That meant crew. That meant flipping burgers at Schwemm's. That meant taking overloading to take courses that piqued my interest even if they didn't fulfill my major requirements, a demanding choice given I was triple majoring at the time.

For a while, it worked. I was busy. I had things to do, places to be. I felt important and necessary and productive. The voice in my head was appeased.

Critically, I thought what I was doing was right. That I was making the best of my situation, that if I was stuck here for four years, paying exorbitant sums for a degree, I might as well extract as much value out of it as I could.

But I wasn't particularly happy. My freshman year, I was quickly disabused of my romantic notions of an elite American liberal arts education. The flaws and contradictions of the system reinforced my insubordination, frictions turned into frustrations, and in my senior year these frustrations blossomed into full-blown fury. Fortunately, I had found my ilk at Amherst. Although certain classes, classmates, and campus discourse nearly drove me into a rage, I found release with my friends, descending into sin and profligacy. Why not? I already had a job lined up, and my signing bonus wasn't going to spend itself.

Many brilliant people I admired had what I considered a fatal flaw, namely substance abuse. Philip K. Dick and meth, Freud and cocaine, Robert Downey Jr. and everything. Paul Erdos, a man who proclaimed that "Mathematics is the surest way to immortality" and that "A mathematician is a device for turning coffee into theorems" had a friend bet him $500 to get off amphetamines for a month. He won the bet, but groused that mathematics had been set back by a month. How, I wondered, could such genius and passion fall prey to drugs and alcohol? I took these men as models, but before Amherst I resolved to never submit to their moments of weakness. Young me, however, could never foresee my four years of friction, frustration, and fury.

Degeneracy deadened the overseer in my head, and opened the door to a radically liberating way of being, one where I was not fundamentally driven by external obligation but rather internal ambition. Thanks to the friends and mentors that enabled, guided and tempered my fall from grace, I realized that for all my pretensions to independence, I was still trying to live up to society's standards. That the high I received from winning at someone else's game, the masochistic satisfaction of being overwhelmed by external obligation, was as substantive as a puff of smoke dissipating into the background.

I am further indebted to my friends and mentors, because they not only rescued me, but were also living examples of a path forward. They demonstrated their tenacity and strength not with school but other, undervalued, endeavors. It takes enormous courage and depth to not only think for oneself but also do what one finds meaningful and valuable.

Marinating in that spa, I realized I was never able to achieve that at Amherst, for I was locked into the framework of maximizing my current short-term situation, for making the most of my expensive Amherst education rather than having the boldness and bravery to chart my own long-term path. Paradoxically, if it weren't for the restrictions that Amherst imposed on me, I would never have broken out of my own prison. Rage unshackled me. Yet I am forever grateful to my friends, who lended me their time and energy to tackle and muzzle the slave driver in my head. I hope to fulfill the promise of such singular inspiration.